---
layout: post
title:  "Halfway Point: Reflections"
date:   2015-02-14 18:40:58
categories: starter league
---

The <a title="The Starter League" href="http://www.starterleague.com" target="_blank">Starter League</a> offers an 11 week web development course that meets three times a week (four if we include our review session, but let's leave that aside for now). That means that we have 33 classes in total. On account of Martin Luther King, Jr. holiday, however, we were only scheduled to have 32 classes. Let's use that as a benchmark (we missed another class on account of a snow day but we will make this up, I believe). This means that after 16 classes we are now officially halfway through the course, and so I now wish to reflect upon my experience so far.

I <a title="Gearing Up" href="http://www.sitzfleisch.org/?p=16" target="_blank">noted</a>, before the first day of class, that I had two primary goals for this course: (1) to build a functional web application from start to finish and (2) to meet new people, especially folks who are part of the Chicago tech community, so I can learn more about a career in the field. How are these going so far?

<em>Build a Functional Web Application</em>

I have certainly learned a great deal about building a functional web application. First, we spent a week on front-end development (including HTML &amp; CSS &amp; Bootstrap) and, though there is much I still don't know, I now have a good sense of where to look to learn more and enough confidence to make an aesthetically-pleasing website in a short amount of time. Indeed, I will use this knowledge in my Rails app, which certainly demands some knowledge of HTML and CSS. I have a sense that I would enjoy front-end development and certainly derive pleasure in making things look pleasing and easy to use.

Next, we dove into the Ruby language. And, again, while there is still so much I would like to learn, we learned enough to begin building in Rails. We have a solid foundation in Ruby and know enough to both read other Rails apps and to add the functionality we need in our own. I like the Ruby language and am competent enough to know where to look when I need to solve challenges I have in my own code. Of course, more practice and experience will always help, and I expect to do that when building my own app.

Third, we have spent a decent amount of time learning how Rails works. The same caveat applies: we dove into the topic, learning the essentials and building up an advanced-beginner's competency, while sometimes glimpsing the hidden depths. And while our knowledge is still that of students' who are new to the subject, we have also gained enough experience and confidence to know where to look for more (for instance, the official <a title="Ruby on Rails Guides" href="http://guides.rubyonrails.org" target="_blank">Rails Guides</a>, which would have been gibberish to me to begin with, now make sense <em>most</em> of the time).

Fourth and most recently, as part of our knowledge of Rails, we have been learning database basics, as well as Domain Modelling and how to design a Rails application, so that we have the data structure we need to build what we want. Databases are, of course, a world unto themselves, a world I think I would like to learn a lot more about,  but we now have enough knowledge under our belts to design our own Rails apps. I still find it a challenge to understand, in a snap, what all the relationships between my tables ought to be and how to map that out, but this will clearly come with time and experience.

We still have a number of substantive things to learn - not least of which is user authentication this upcoming week - and we are going to sharpen our skills by building at least two more database-backed web applications in class. This will all be grist to our mill, as we build our own functional web app. I suspect that will be the focus of much of my time, beginning this week. There are 5 weeks left in the course, and I intend to have a functional prototype of my app ('Solidify') by the end of the class in late March, no matter how long this takes. This is where I will put to use everything I've learned so far, and because it's my own project, I suspect it will really solidify what I've learned so far.

<em>Meet People and Learn About the Industry</em>

What about this second goal? I suspect there will be much more to come in this regard, especially as we near the end of the course and present our work. But one thing that has been very helpful in this regard—something oddly not advertised by the Starter League in their marketing materials—is the pairing up of mentors (Starter League/School alums) with current students. So I have been paired up with a Starter School alum who is a full-time developer, and most of my classmates now have similar pairings. What's more, all of the mentors for our class have been invited (and contribute to) our class website, where we discuss issues related to the class, as well as more general queries. Thus, through the Starter League, I am now connected to perhaps a few dozen people who are part of the tech community in Chicago and elsewhere, folks who, for the most part, work as professional developers of one sort of another.

This is an amazing resource, which I expect to use even more, as the course enters its final quarter. For instance, I know some of my classmates have shadowed their mentors at work for a day and have got to see how professional developers work 'in the wild'. I plan on doing this too. Therefore, while this goal of meeting people and learning about the industry has not yet been fully realised, all the elements are in place for me to take advantage of it in the final 5 weeks. And this timing makes sense too: before now, I was too green around the ears to appreciate the resources in front of me and not knowledgeable enough to ask helpful questions. Now I am.

A final thought: As we enter the second half of the course, I am going to write more about the web application that I am building ('Solidify'), in addition to what we learn in class. I have no doubt building my own app will present its own challenges, and it will be fun to document those here. In fact, my next post will be a description of <em>Solidify</em> - what I want it to do - as well as my motivation for creating it.
